K8s auto-instrumentation details and example (Node.js) (#59)
elastic/opentelemetry: docs/kubernetes/operator/instrumenting-nodejs.md

      ```bash
      $ kubectl describe pod nodejs-app-8d84c47b8-8h5z2 -n nodejs-ns
      Name:             nodejs-app-8d84c47b8-8h5z2
      Namespace:        nodejs-ns
      ...
      ...
      Init Containers:
        opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
          Container ID:  containerd://cbf67d7ca1bd62c25614b905a11e81405bed6fd215f2df21f84b90fd0279230b
          Image:         docker.elastic.co/observability/elastic-otel-node:0.5.0
          Command:
            cp
            -r
            /autoinstrumentation/.
            /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs
          State:          Terminated
            Reason:       Completed
            Exit Code:    0
            Started:      Wed, 13 Nov 2024 15:47:02 +0100
            Finished:     Wed, 13 Nov 2024 15:47:03 +0100
          Ready:          True
          Restart Count:  0
          Environment:    <none>
          Mounts:
            /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
            /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount from kube-api-access-swhn5 (ro)
      ```

>     - The main container of the deployment is linking the SDK through `NODE_OPTIONS` environment variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The main container of the deployment loads the SDK through the `NODE_OPTIONS` environment variable:
```

      ```bash
      ...
      Containers:
        nodejs-app:
          Environment:
      ...
            NODE_OPTIONS:                           --require /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs/autoinstrumentation.js
            OTEL_SERVICE_NAME:                     nodejs-app
            OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT:           http://opentelemetry-kube-stack-daemon-collector.opentelemetry-operator-system.svc.cluster.local:4318
      ...
      ```

    - The Pod has an `EmptyDir` volume named `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs` mounted in both the main and the init containers in path `/otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs`.

      ```bash
      Init Containers:
        opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
      ...
          Mounts:
            /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
      Containers:
        nodejs-app:
      ...
          Mounts:
            /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
      ...
      Volumes:
      ...
        opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
          Type:        EmptyDir (a temporary directory that shares a pod's lifetime)
      ```

>     Ensure the environment variable `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` points to a valid endpoint and there's network communication between the Pod and the endpoint.

Reviewer: This sentence is probably intended to be up with the preceding bullet showing the environment variables.

Author: yep, I'll fix it :) thanks!

          OTEL_SERVICE_NAME:                     nodejs-app
          OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT:           http://opentelemetry-kube-stack-daemon-collector.opentelemetry-operator-system.svc.cluster.local:4318
    ...
    ```

    - The Pod has an `EmptyDir` volume named `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs` mounted in both the main and the init containers in path `/otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs`.

    ```bash
    Init Containers:
      opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
    ...
        Mounts:
          /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
    Containers:
      nodejs-app:
    ...
        Mounts:
          /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
    ...
    Volumes:
    ...
      opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
        Type:        EmptyDir (a temporary directory that shares a pod's lifetime)
    ```

    Ensure the environment variable `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` points to a valid endpoint and there's network communication between the Pod and the endpoint.

> **END OF REVIEW NEEDED SECTION**

Author: @trentm : would you please review this section? I have just copied and pasted from the Java doc, as I haven't run any Node.js test in my environment.

There are references to `java agent` and `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` env vars that need to be removed.
If you can update this from a real example that would be great.

Reviewer: Reviewed now: https://github.com/elastic/opentelemetry/pull/59#pullrequestreview-2494017546
Sorry for the delay.

Author: Awesome, thanks!

# Instrumenting Node.js applications with EDOT SDKs on Kubernetes

This document focuses on instrumenting Node.js applications on Kubernetes, using the OpenTelemetry Operator, the Elastic Distribution of OpenTelemetry (EDOT) Collectors, and the [EDOT Node.js](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-nodejs) SDK.

- For general knowledge about the EDOT Node.js SDK, refer to the [getting started guide](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-node/blob/main/packages/opentelemetry-node/docs/get-started.md) and [configuration](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-node/blob/main/packages/opentelemetry-node/docs/configure.md).

> - For Node.js auto-instrumentation specifics, refer to [OpenTelemetry Operator Node.js auto-instrumentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/kubernetes/operator/automatic/#nodejs).

Author: @trentm : I have added this useful link as we added it in the Python and Java guides.

1. Ensure you have successfully [installed the OpenTelemetry Operator](./README.md), and confirm that the following `Instrumentation` object exists in the system:

    ```bash
    $ kubectl get instrumentation -n opentelemetry-operator-system
    NAME                      AGE    ENDPOINT
    elastic-instrumentation   107s   http://opentelemetry-kube-stack-daemon-collector.opentelemetry-operator-system.svc.cluster.local:4318
    ```
    > [!NOTE]
    > If your `Instrumentation` object has a different name or is created in a different namespace, you will have to adapt the annotation value in the next step.

2. Enable auto-instrumentation of your Node.js application using one of the following methods:

    - Edit your application workload definition and include the annotation under `spec.template.metadata.annotations`:

    ```yaml
    kind: Deployment
    metadata:
      name: nodejs-app
      namespace: nodejs-ns
    spec:
    ...
      template:
        metadata:
    ...
          annotations:
            instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-nodejs: opentelemetry-operator-system/elastic-instrumentation
    ...

>     ```

Reviewer: indentation nit: If you indent this section one more level, then it will be "under" the `- Edit your ...` bullet.  Similarly for some code blocks below.

Author: updated, thanks a lot!

    - Alternatively, add the annotation at namespace level to apply auto-instrumentation in all Pods of the namespace:

    ```bash
    kubectl annotate namespace nodejs-ns instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-nodejs=opentelemetry-operator-system/elastic-instrumentation
    ```

3. Restart application

    Once the annotation has been set, restart the application to create new Pods and inject the instrumentation libraries:

    ```bash
    kubectl rollout restart deployment nodejs-app -n nodejs-ns
    ```

4. Verify the [auto-instrumentation resources](./instrumenting-applications.md#how-auto-instrumentation-works) are injected in the Pods:

    Run a `kubectl describe` of one of your application Pods and check:

**REVIEW NEEDED HERE, it's a copy & paste from java SDK used as javaagent**

>     - There should be an init container named `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs` in the Pod:

Reviewer: Perhaps:

```suggestion
    - There should be an init container named `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs` in the Pod. For exapmle:
```

Though perhaps I'm not giving the reader enough credit to realize that the specific pod name will differ for them.

    ```bash
    $ kubectl describe pod nodejs-app-8d84c47b8-8h5z2 -n nodejs-ns
    Name:             nodejs-app-8d84c47b8-8h5z2
    Namespace:        nodejs-ns
    ...
    ...
    Init Containers:
      opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
        Container ID:  containerd://cbf67d7ca1bd62c25614b905a11e81405bed6fd215f2df21f84b90fd0279230b

>         Image:         docker.elastic.co/observability/elastic-otel-nodejs:1.0.0
>         Image ID:      docker.elastic.co/observability/elastic-otel-nodejs@sha256:28d65d04a329c8d5545ed579d6c17f0d74800b7b1c5875e75e0efd29e210566a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Image:         docker.elastic.co/observability/elastic-otel-node:0.5.0
        Image ID:      docker.elastic.co/observability/elastic-otel-nodejs@sha256:ae6a699442ab33f661ed6aa1f38393f55a31038038ae194e1f9a858bc8df06ab
```

        Port:          <none>
        Host Port:     <none>
        Command:

>           cp
>           /nodejsagent.jar
>           /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs/nodejsagent.jar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          cp
          -r
          /autoinstrumentation/.
          /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs
```

        State:          Terminated
          Reason:       Completed
          Exit Code:    0
          Started:      Wed, 13 Nov 2024 15:47:02 +0100
          Finished:     Wed, 13 Nov 2024 15:47:03 +0100
        Ready:          True
        Restart Count:  0
        Environment:    <none>
        Mounts:
          /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
          /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount from kube-api-access-swhn5 (ro)
    ```

    - The main container of the deployment is using the SDK as `nodejsagent`:

    ```bash
    ...
    Containers:
      nodejs-app:
        Environment:
    ...

>           JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:                      -nodejsagent:/otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs/nodejsagent.jar
>           OTEL_SERVICE_NAME:                     nodejs-app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          NODE_OPTIONS:                           --require /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs/autoinstrumentation.js
          OTEL_SERVICE_NAME:                     nodejs-app
```

    ...
    ```

    - The Pod has an `EmptyDir` volume named `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs` mounted in both the main and the init containers in path `/otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs`.

    ```bash
    Init Containers:
      opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
    ...
        Mounts:
          /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
    Containers:
      nodejs-app:
    ...
        Mounts:
          /otel-auto-instrumentation-nodejs from opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs (rw)
    ...
    Volumes:
    ...
      opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs:
        Type:        EmptyDir (a temporary directory that shares a pod's lifetime)
    ```

    Ensure the environment variable `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` points to a valid endpoint and there's network communication between the Pod and the endpoint.

**END OF REVIEW NEEDED SECTION**

5. Confirm data is flowing to **Kibana**:

    - Open **Observability** -> **Applications** -> **Service inventory**, and determine if:

>       - The application appears in the list of services (`nodejs-app` in the example).

Author: @mdbirnstiehl , @trentm : does the parenthetical statement makes sense here? or would you elaborate it in a different way?

Maybe directly what @trentm suggested in a different thread?
> The application `nodejs-app` appears in the list of services.

Reviewer: Looks fine as you have it.

      - The application shows transactions and metrics.

      > [!TIP]

>       > Generate some traffic to your application to ensure there are transactions and metrics to see. You can use `kubectl port-forward` for this purpose is your application is not exposed externally.

Author: @trentm , @mdbirnstiehl : What do you think about that TIP text?

It's going to depend on the type of application and the code itself. In some cases just the application start generates enough data to be able to see it in Kibana -> APM, but sometimes it's necessary to generate traffic.

I'm trying to write something simple, but I'm open to any other idea ;)

Reviewer: Perhaps change "transactions" to "spans" in case this is an OTel person reading this who doesn't know Elastic usage of the term "transaction" well.

I don't know k8s that well and don't know, without some hunting around, how to use `kubectl port-forward` to generate some traffic. I'd consider dropping the "You can use ..." sentence.  I don't have a strong opinion, however.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      > [!TIP]
      > You may need to generate traffic to your application to see spans and metrics. Do this using `kubectl port-forward` if your application is not exposed externally.
```
Maybe something like this since it could be situational?

# Instrumenting Node.js applications with EDOT SDKs on Kubernetes

> This document focuses on instrumenting Node.js applications on Kubernetes, using [Elastic Distribution of OpenTelemetry Node.js (EDOT Node.js)](https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-nodejs) together with the OpenTelemetry Operator and the EDOT Collectors described in the [getting started](./README.md) guide.

Author: Changing this in my next commit to match the other 2 guides (sorry I hadn't aligned them earlier).

  - Adding an annotation to the deployment pods.
  - Adding an annotation to the namespace.
- Verify that auto-instrumentation libraries are injected and configured correctly.
- Confirm data is flowing to **Kibana Observability**.

For demonstration purposes, we assume the application to be instrumented is a deployment named `nodejs-app` running in the `nodejs-ns` namespace.

1. Ensure you have successfully [installed the OpenTelemetry Operator](./README.md), and confirm that the following `Instrumentation` object exists in the system:

```bash
$ kubectl get instrumentation -n opentelemetry-operator-system
NAME                      AGE    ENDPOINT                                                                                                
elastic-instrumentation   107s   http://opentelemetry-kube-stack-daemon-collector.opentelemetry-operator-system.svc.cluster.local:4318
```
> [!NOTE]
> If your `Instrumentation` object has a different name or is created in a different namespace, you will have to adapt the annotation value in the next step.

2. Enable auto-instrumentation of the Node.js application using one of the following methods:

>   - Edit the workload definition and include the annotation under `spec.template.metadata.annotations`:

Author: Million thanks! I'll keep an eye on this, didn't know that!

    ```yaml
    spec:
    ...
      template:
        metadata:
          labels:
            app: nodejs-app
          annotations:
            instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-nodejs: opentelemetry-operator-system/elastic-instrumentation
    ...
    ```

  - Alternatively, add the annotation at namespace level to apply auto-instrumentation in all Pods of the namespace:

    ```bash
    kubectl annotate namespace nodejs-ns instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-nodejs=opentelemetry-operator-system/elastic-instrumentation
    ```

3. Restart application:

  Once the annotation has been set, the Pods need to be recreated for the instrumentation libraries to be injected.

    ```bash
    kubectl rollout restart deployment nodejs-app -n nodejs
    ```

4. Verify the auto-instrumentation resources are injected in the Pod:

  Node.js apps are instrumented by the OpenTelemetry Operator with the following actions:
(TBD / WE NEED TO REVIEW HOW THIS IS DONE / NODE_OPTIONS env var?)

  - ??It adds an init container in the Pod with the objective of copying the SDK to a shared volume.

  - ??Defines an `emptyDir volume` mounted in both containers.

>   - ??Adds `NODE_OPTIONS` and other OTEL related environment variables.

Reviewer: The mechanism is basically the same as for Python and Java. I'd describe it in this order (slightly diff order to how you ahve it for the Python and Java docs):

1. An `emptyDir` volume (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#emptydir) is created, named `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs` and is mounted in the app container and a new init container.
2. An init container, named `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-nodejs`, is created using the EDOT Node.js image `docker.elastic.co/observability/elastic-otel-node:<version>`. This init container copies the EDOT Node.js SDK to the shared volume.
3. Environment variables are added to the app container to configure (`OTEL_*` variables) and start (`NODE_OPTIONS` variable) the EDOT Node.js SDK.

It would be good to go through the example and get the output of the `kubectl describe pod ...` commands to show the values for Node.js. Let me know if you'd like me to do that to get the values.

Author: Now the description of the instrumentation steps has been moved to the `instrumenting_applications.md`, under `How auto-instrumentation works` section.

I have changed the order of the steps there, I agree it's better to start with the `emptyDir` volume.
You will see the change in the next commit, and in the `Node.js` specific doc we will have:

> 4. Verify the [auto-instrumentation resources](./instrumenting-applications.md#how-auto-instrumentation-works) are injected in the Pod:

> 5. Confirm data is flowing through in **Kibana**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Confirm data is flowing to **Kibana**:
```

Author: solved when aligning the content with the other guides (this was already fixed in the other guides :) )

>   - Open Observability -> Applications -> Service Inventory, and determine if:

Reviewer: Could bold these as done in the Python and Java equivalents:

```suggestion
  - Open **Observability -> Applications -> Service Inventory**, and determine if:
```

>     - The application appears in the list of services.

Reviewer: Perhaps this:

```suggestion
    - The `nodejs-app` service in the list of services.
```

Author: As the `nodejs-app` is just an hypothetical example (we are not providing an example manifest) and the user is expected to instrument their own application I prefer to keep that generic.
I have updated it to:
>       - The application appears in the list of services (`nodejs-app` in the example).

>     - The application shows transactions and metrics.

Reviewer: It is possible we want to hedge on there being transactions to see. If the deployed application has not received any requests/activity, then there won't be any trace data.

Author: Good point, I think I'm going to add in all guides (and the troubleshooting doc) something about it, like ensuring the application gets some traffic and generates some traces before checking in Kibana.

Also it's usually very easy to generate traffic using `kubectl port-forward,  so we can add an example.

What would you suggest?

Reviewer: I have used a few things in the past:
- Specifically add a request-to-self in the application code so that there is always at least one request to it (perhaps a little awkward to have that in the code)
- Rely on traffic from a Docker Compose healthcheck. However, we obviously aren't using Compose here. I'm ignorant enough with k8s to know if here is some typicaly/stock healthcheck facility.
- Explicitly have a loadgen container somewhere in the system.  This can be nice for showing application metrics. However, adding a loadgen container perhaps complicates the "getting started" demo.

Author: I have added a `TIP` on that section and pinged you and Mike for review. Marking this as resolved for now.

>   - For application container logs, open **Kibana Discover** and filter for your pods logs. In the provided example we could filter them with any of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For application container logs, open **Kibana Discover** and filter for your pod's logs. In the provided example we could filter them with any of:
```

Author: We fixed this in another doc, but there was a discussion between `pod's` and `pods'` and we decided the latter because the application could have multiple pods.
